# A fast input parsing on .NET

In times past, when .NET and C# were a proprietary Windows-only technologies, they gained a reputation as an excellent enterprise software platform, but were considered unsuitable for competitive programming and high-performance code.

I often heard complaints about the slowness of the C# language in the context of algorithmic tasks. I also encountered real problems on the .NET platform, receiving "Wrong Answer," "Runtime Error," "Memory Limit," and "Time Limit" verdicts with correct algorithms.

Most of these problems relates to console input and output. And it's often much easier to write `cin >> n` or `sc.nextInt()` than `int.Parse(Console.ReadLine())` or `Console.ReadLine().Split().Select(int.Parse).ToArray()``.

Next, I will tell you about common problems with console I/O in .NET, and how to make input fast and convenient.

Furthermore, I give you this code for fast plain-text input as a concise code snippet that can be easily copied into your program and used on online judging systems.

<!--truncate-->

## Floating comma

Sometimes you need to read or output a floating point number. However, it is easy to forget that in .NET, floating points use commas, depending on the locale. This is especially easy to forget if you use an English locale on your operating system, but the target system is not.

There are two options:
 - Set the thread locale: `Thread.CurrentThread.CurrentCulture = CultureInfo.InvariantCulture;`
 - pass `CultureInfo.InvariantCulture` explicitly to methods like `(Try)Parse` and `ToString`

Also in modern .NET there is an `InvariantGlobalization` runtime parameter to avoid such problems.

## Input and output together

Imagine that we are given a simple problem: we need to read $N (N <= 2*10^5)$ rows with 4 `int` numbers in each $(a_i < 10^6)$, the numbers are separated by spaces. We need to count and output the sum of numbers for each line.

```csharp
int n = int.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i)
{
  var result = Console.ReadLine().Split().Select(int.Parse).Sum();
  Console.WriteLine(result);
}
```

Could anything in this code lead to a verdict other than "Accepted"? It is certainly possible.

### Formatting

The statement does not specify the number of spaces that separate the numbers. Additionally, if there are multiple spaces in a row, Console.ReadLine().Split() will return an array containing empty lines. And `int.Parse` will then fail with an exception, resulting in a "Runtime Error" verdict. It may seem that this does not happen in contests, but alas, the case is quite real.

Fixing the code:

```csharp
int n = int.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i)
{
  var result = Console.ReadLine()
    .Split(' ', StringSplitOptions.RemoveEmptyEntries)
    .Select(int.Parse)
    .Sum();

  Console.WriteLine(result);
}
```

An unpleasant detail that must be remembered. When previously the code treated all white space characters as delimiters, now only spaces. It is solvable by providing all the separators explicitly or by filtering via  `.Where(...)` method, but it require more code.

The issue arises only when reading input line by line. In languages where there are pre-existing methods to read from the console number by number (e.g., int n; cin >> n), the issue does not arise at all.

### Console.Flush

The input and output streams `stdin/stdout/stderr` are based on an in-memory buffers that one process can write to and another can read. Accessing this buffer for a few bytes is expensive, so each process can additionally buffer I/O for efficiency. Data is flushed into the native stream buffer either by filling the local buffer or by calling .Flush().

Calling .Flush() makes a lot of sense for interactive console applications - the user needs to see the output in the terminal immediately. Most platforms are natively adapted to this scenario and call `.Flush()` automatically after every write.

Note that there are also tasks that require interactive I/O (request-response semantics). For example, tasks in which it is required to calculate the answer by asking "questions" to the checking system (the simplest example is a program that guesses the word in Wordle, "communicating" with the other program)

To save on the amount of `.Flush()` calls, with C++ iostreams some [spells](https://www.stroustrup.com/Performance-TR.pdf#page=63) should be used:
```cpp
std::ios::sync_with_stdio(false);
std::cin.tie(nullptr);
```

And in C#, it could be done with `StreamWriter` class (you should use it instead of static `Console` methods):
```csharp
const int bufferSize = 16384;
using var input = new StreamReader(
  Console.OpenStandardInput(), bufferSize: bufferSize);
using var output = new StreamWriter(
  Console.OpenStandardOutput(), bufferSize: bufferSize);

int n = int.Parse(input.ReadLine());
for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i)
{
  var result = input.ReadLine()
    .Split(' ', StringSplitOptions.RemoveEmptyEntries)
    .Select(int.Parse)
    .Sum();

  output.WriteLine(result);
}
```

Let's check if `.Flush()` has a performance impact by some measurements. The version with `Console.WriteLine` works on my computer in ~490ms, and with the `StreamWriter` - in 105ms. Those the reason for poor performance was not in LINQ, as you could think! In a checking system with slower hardware, you can easily get "Time Limit Exceed" if you do not take into account the automatic `.Flush()`. By the way, in enterprise applications, the similar problem also occurs - in logging.

Measured on Linux with .NET 7 NativeAOT runtime — this is how the minimum overhead is achieved at the start of the program, about 1.5 ms. On Windows, at least the start of the process would be around 10 ms, even for C++.

You can also use `StreamReader` instead of `Console` for reading. This allows you to save on checking if `Console.In` is redefined on each read and use a larger buffer, but the gain is much less impressive — a few milliseconds

Please note that it makes no sense to set the buffer size for the any console stream itself - the parameter is simply ignored. It is meaningful only for `StreamReader` and `StreamWriter`, which is wrappers over the console stream.

### Input reading and allocations

Consider the [1510 problem](https://timus.online/problem.aspx?space=1&num=1510&locale=en) from Timus. There are two solutions for this problem - linear and the one with sorting. Everyone passes it easily on C++, but in C#, even with a smart algorithm, due to the limitations of the standard input, there will be "Memory Limit" verdict. Why?

The problem has memory limit of 16 MB. While this does not prevent storing all the input in memory, because $sizeof(int)*500000 < 16 MB$, each integer serialized as a .NET `string` occupies significantly more space:

 - 16 bytes for header and method table pointer on x64
 - 4 bytes for string length
 - 20 bytes for 10 UTF-16 characters
 - 2 bytes for null terminator char

So, ~42 bytes for 10 characters. $42 * 500000 = 21 * 10^6 > 16 MB$

Yes, these strings are short-lived, but it is not guaranteed that the GC will clean them up and reclaim memory during program's run time. Even a solution using a `StreamReader` will fail with a Memory Limit Exceed verdict!

Forcing garbage collection with `GC.Collect` may lead to the "Time Limit" verdict. What to do? Writing the custom input.

## Csutom input

### Old-style solution
Let's rewrite some C++ function for fast [char](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/8080?#comment-138179)-by-[char](https://www.google.com/search?q=c%252B%252B+fastscan+getchar_unlocked) input reading on C#.

In C#, `Console.Read()` or `StreamReader.Read()` may be used instead of C++ `getchar`. After that, this problem will be no-problem at all. And also, char-by-char reading of integers is at least 3 times faster than with `Console.ReadLine()`.

```csharp
StreamReader reader = new StreamReader(Console.OpenStandardInput(), bufferSize: 32768);

int fastscan()
{
    bool negative = false;
    bool read_start = false;

    int number = 0;

    while (true)
    {
        int c = reader.Read();

        if (c=='-')
        {
            negative = true;
            read_start = true;
            continue;
        }

        if (c>47 && c<58)
        {
            number = number * 10 + (c - 48);
            read_start = true;
            continue;
        }

        if (read_start)
            break;
    }

    if (negative)
        number *= -1;
    return number;
}
```

The solution, however, is not perfect. This method is suitable for integers, but it is not trivial to parse floating point numbers correctly, it is easy to fall into edge cases and make mistakes with precision. To understand this, just look at this [Pull Request](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/62301).

### Modern .NET solution

Modern .NET has overloads of the `Parse` and `TryParse` methods that take `ReadOnlySpan<char>` instead of a string. Instead of manually parsing numbers, you can write a characters representing a number to the buffer and call the standard method for parsing.

This will solve the problem of parsing floating-point numbers of the "old-style" solution, and also make code more convenient, eliminating the need to write constructs like Console.ReadLine().Split().Select(int.Parse).ToArray(). The code itself is so simple that it can be easily written right during the contest (but it doesn't handle some edge cases, like a buffer overflow, if this is important to you):

```csharp
class Scanner
{
  StreamReader input = new(Console.OpenStandardInput(), bufferSize: 16384);
  char[] buffer = new char[4096];

  public int ReadInt()
  {
    var length = PrepareToken();
    return int.Parse(buffer.AsSpan(0, length));
  }

  private int PrepareToken()
  {
    int length = 0;
    bool readStart = false;
    while (true)
    {
      int ch = input.Read();
      if (ch == -1)
        break;

      if (char.IsWhiteSpace((char)ch))
      {
        if (readStart) break;
        continue;
      }

      readStart = true;
      buffer[length++] = (char)ch;
    }

    return length;
  }
}
```

|  Program |Lang |  Compiler | Mean (Int) | Mean (Double) |
|--------- |---- |---------- |-----------:|--------------:|
| fastscan | C++ |     g++64 |      14 ms |             - |
| fastscan | C#  | NativeAOT |      22 ms |             - |
|  Span| C#  | NativeAOT |      38 ms |        85 ms |
|        cin | C++ |     g++64 |      38 ms |        101 ms |
|    scanf | C++ |     g++64 |      44 ms |         70 ms |
|  Console.ReadLine | C#  | NativeAOT |      64 ms |        117 ms |

Yes, it works slower than the "fastscan", but it fast enough to not lead to Time Limits. It is allocation-free, and certainly will not hit Memory Limit!

For .NET 7 and C# 11, you can make a generic version based on the ISpanParsable<TSelf> interface static method. But C# 11 is not yet wide-supported on the platforms like [codeforces.com](https://codeforces.com).

::: note

In C++ and other languages, you can write more efficient versions of console input. `scanf` and `cin` are only taken to compare with input reading methods, which usually fall within the Time Limit

:::

### Get rid of StreamReader

`StreamReader` is a layer between the Console Stream, which usually contains ASCII characters and .NET UTF-16 encoded strings. Let's rewrite the code to work with Stream directly.

The parsing method that accepts `ReadOnlySpan<char>` is no longer suitable. Luckily, .NET has the `Utf8Parser` class, which is widely used in the `System.Text.Json` library that performs the same task for byte spans. Do not be deceived by the fact that the name contains `Utf8` - it does not capable to parse all [Unicode digits](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numerals_in_Unicode). But with the usual ASCII-digits copes with a bang!

The advantage of Utf8Parser.TryParse compared to T.TryParse is the ability to parse a value from a prefix, without a prepared token. Compare:

```csharp
bool TryParse(ReadOnlySpan<char> span, out int value, IFormatProvider provider);
bool TryParse(ReadOnlySpan<byte> span, out int value, out int bytesConsumed, char format='\0')
```

The first method forces you to lookahead in advance and find the separator. The data is then read again for parsing.

The second one can stop itself while parsing the token, allowing you to parse the data in one pass through the buffer.

Because Utf8Parser is a rather highly specialized class, it does not support IFormatProvider and locales. But this is only a joy for us - the decimal *comma* does not interfere with us here.

When using Utf8Parser, you need to take into account that if there is not enough data left in the buffer, the result may be incorrect. If any of the text tokens is fetched by different readings from the data stream, for example `[.........12][34...........]`, then Utf8Parser will read this token as two different numbers — 12 and 34. Or for `[........1e][7.......]` it will return false for `1e`, and you will have to do an additional check: either this is an invalid `double` or just not enough data in the buffer.

To simplify the implementation, I will require the presence in the buffer of a certain minimum amount of data or a sign of the end of the data stream. The code itself is also quite simple and only deals with loading data from the stream and skipping delimiters, which here are considered to be all characters with codes from 0 to 32 (space). Also you can also skip characters, for example, with codes >= 128, in case garbage gets into the data stream.

But during the contest, I would rather use the previous option based on StreamReader and Span - it's still much simpler

```csharp
class Scanner
{
    private const int MaxTokenLength = 1200;

    Stream? input = Console.OpenStandardInput();
    byte[] buffer = new byte[32768];
    Span<byte> Fragment => buffer.AsSpan(offset, length - offset);

    int offset;
    int length;

    public int ReadInt()
    {
        while (input != null && length - offset < MaxTokenLength)
        {
            if (offset != 0)
            {
                var remaining = Fragment.Length;
                Fragment.CopyTo(buffer);
                offset = 0;
                length = remaining;
            }

            var count = input.Read(buffer, length, buffer.Length - length);
            if (count <= 0)
            {
                input = null;
                break;
            }

            length += count;
            while (offset < length && buffer[offset] <= ' ') offset++;
        }
        while (offset < length && buffer[offset] <= ' ') offset++;

        var parsed = Utf8Parser.TryParse(Fragment, out int value, out int bytesConsumed);
        if (!parsed)
            Throw();
        offset += bytesConsumed;
        return value;
    }

    void Throw() => throw new Exception();
}
```

## Measurements

|  Program |Lang |  Compiler | Mean (Int) | Mean (Double) |
|--------- |---- |---------- |-----------:|--------------:|
|  Utf8Parser| C#  | NativeAOT |      10 ms |        40 ms |
| fastscan | C++ |     g++64 |      14 ms |             - |
| fastscan | C#  | NativeAOT |      22 ms |             - |
|  SpanBlock| C#  | NativeAOT |      24 ms |        72 ms |
|  Span| C#  | NativeAOT |      38 ms |        85 ms |
|        cin | C++ |     g++64 |      38 ms |        101 ms |
|    scanf | C++ |     g++64 |      44 ms |         70 ms |
|  Console.ReadLine | C#  | NativeAOT |      64 ms |        117 ms |

A file with 200,000 lines of six-digit numbers, 4 numbers each (~5MB) was used as test data. Each program XORed each of the columns and printed the answer at the end. Thus, only input performance was tested by the considered methods, with the ability to check the correctness during testing. The input data was pre-loaded into the memory of the program launching the tested programs and supplied to stdin.

.NET 7 NativeAOT on Linux was used as a runtime. This option gives the least overhead at the start of the program. With JIT on Windows, the overhead was ~36 ms, on Linux - ~70. The order of speed for .NET programs on Windows is the same.

The test does not pretend to be the most correct, the only goal was to evaluate the order of difference between the ways of reading the input.

## Conclusion
- You can write programs with intensive console IO on .NET.
- For maximum performance:
  -Do not use static methods Console.Write/WriteLine, but write to stdout via StreamWriter
  -For reading a large amount of numbers from the console (or just for the convenience of writing code), use `TryParse(ReadOnlySpan<char>)` or `Utf8Parser`
- Evaluate the problems and not overcomplicate the code unnecessarily


## Links
 - [Sources](https://github.com/epeshk/epeshk.text)
 - [Nuget package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Epeshk.Text/0.0.1)
